Title: Primordial black hole
Summary:
In cosmology, primordial black holes (PBHs) are hypothetical black holes that formed soon after the Big Bang. In the inflationary era and early radiation-dominated universe, extremely dense pockets of subatomic matter may have been tightly packed to the point of gravitational collapse, creating primordial black holes without the supernova compression typically needed to make black holes today. Because the creation of primordial black holes would pre-date the first stars, they are not limited to the narrow mass range of stellar black holes.
In 1966, Yakov Zeldovich and Igor Novikov first proposed the existence of such black holes, while the first in-depth study was conducted by Stephen Hawking in 1971. However, their existence has not been proven and remains hypothetical. In September 2022, primordial black holes were proposed by some researchers to explain the unexpected very large early galaxies discovered by the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST).
PBHs have long been considered possibly important if not nearly exclusive components of dark matter, the latter perspective having been strengthened by both LIGO/Virgo interferometer gravitational wave and JWST observations. Early constraints on PBHs as dark matter usually assumed most black holes would have similar or identical ("monochromatic") mass, which was disproven by LIGO/Virgo results, and further suggestions that the actual black hole mass distribution is broadly platykurtic were evident from JWST observations of early large galaxies. Recent analyses agree, suggesting a broad mass distribution with a mode around one solar mass.
Many PBHs may have the mass of an asteroid but the size of a hydrogen atom and be travelling at enormous speeds, with one likely being within the solar system at any given time. Most likely, such PBHs would pass right through a star "like a bullet", without any significant effects on the star. However, the ones traveling slowly would have a chance of being captured by the star. Stephen Hawking proposed that our Sun may harbor such a PBH.
